<!--
  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
  contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
  this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
  The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
  (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
  the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

      http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
  limitations under the License.
-->

# The following tests use the file: testDfdlElement.dfdl.xsd

Place the cursor on line 34, column 27 at the end of the line \<xs:group
name = \"test\"\>. Type a space.

\[ \] Verify drop down contains xs:annotation and xs:sequence.

Place the cursor at line 36, column 18 at the end of the line
\<xs:sequence\>. Type a space.

\[ \] Verify dropdown contains xs:annotation, xs:choice, xs:element
name, xs:element ref, and xs:sequence.

Place cursor at line 40, column 40 at the end of the line \<xs:element
name=\"Keyword\"\>. Type a space.

\[ \] Verify dropdown contains dfdl:alignment, dfdl:alignmentUnits,
dfdl:binaryBooleanFalseRep, dfdl:binaryBooleanTrueRep,
dfdl:binaryNumberRep, dfdl:bitOrder, dfdl:byteOrder,
dfdl:choiceBranchKey, dfdl:encoding, dfdl:inputValueCalc, dfdl:lenght,
dfdl:lengthKind, dfdl:lengthPattern, dfdl:lengthUnits, dfdl:occursCount,
dfdl:occursCountKind, dfdl:outputNewLine dfdl:outputValueCalc,
dfdl:prefxIncludesPrefixLength, dfdl:prefixLengthType,
dfdl:representation, dfdl:terminator, maxOccurs, minOccurs, name: ref,
and type.

\[ \] Verify dropdown appears with above listed elements, and the first
line in dropdown is highlighted with a description of the highlighted
item beside it.

\[ \] Verify a dropdown appears with the above listed elements and
pressing the down arrow key displays the description of each highlighted
element.

Place the cursor at line 18 and hover over the attribute dfdl:alignment.

\[ \] Verify a text box appears with a definition for dfdl:alignment.

Place the cursor at line 53, column 43 after \<xs:element
name=\"Datastream\". Type a space.

\[ \] Verify the dropdown contains dfdl:alignment, dfdl:alignmentUnits,
dfdl:binaryBooleanFalseRep, dfdl:binaryBooleanTrueRep,
dfdl:binaryNumberRep, dfdl:bitOrder, dfdl:byteOrder,
dfdl:choiceBranchKey, dfdl:encoding, dfdl:inputValueCalc, dfdl:lenght,
dfdl:lengthKind, dfdl:lengthPattern, dfdl:lengthUnits, dfdl:occursCount,
dfdl:occursCountKind, dfdl:outputNewLine dfdl:outputValueCalc,
dfdl:prefxIncludesPrefixLength, dfdl:prefixLengthType,
dfdl:representation, dfdl:terminator, maxOccurs, minOccurs, name: ref,
and type.

Place cursor at line 52, column 26, after \</xs:element\>.

Type a space.

\[ \] Verify the dropdown contains xs:annotation, xs:choice, xs:element
name, dfdl:element ref, and xs:sequence.

Place cursor at line 54, column 26, before \</xs:sequence\>. Type a space.

\[ \] Verify the dropdown contains xs:annotation, xs:choice, xs:element
name, dfdl:element ref, and xs:sequence.

Place cursor at line 37, column 30 between the ending quote and the
greater than sign. Type a space.

\[ \] Verify the dropdown contains dfdl:alignment, dfdl:alignmentUnits,
dfdl:binaryBooleanFalseRep, dfdl:binaryBooleanTrueRep,
dfdl:binaryNumberRep, dfdl:bitOrder, dfdl:byteOrder,
dfdl:choiceBranchKey, dfdl:encoding, dfdl:inputValueCalc, dfdl:lenght,
dfdl:lengthKind, dfdl:lengthPattern, dfdl:lengthUnits, dfdl:occursCount,
dfdl:occursCountKind, dfdl:outputNewLine dfdl:outputValueCalc,
dfdl:prefxIncludesPrefixLength, dfdl:prefixLengthType,
dfdl:representation, dfdl:terminator, maxOccurs, minOccurs, name: ref,
and type.

Select dfd:byteOrder from the suggestion list, then bigEndian as the
byte order pattern from the suggestion list.

\[ \] Verify the attribute and byte order pattern are inserted and
spaced appropriately.

\[ \] Verify the dfdl: prefix is inserted with the attribute name.

Place cursor at line 26, column 46, \<dfdl:element
representation=\"text\". Type a space.

\[ \] Verify the dropdown contains dfdl:alignment, dfdl:alignmentUnits,
dfdl:binaryBooleanFalseRep, dfdl:binaryBooleanTrueRep,
dfdl:binaryNumberRep, dfdl:bitOrder, dfdl:byteOrder,
dfdl:choiceBranchKey, dfdl:encoding, dfdl:inputValueCalc, dfdl:lenght,
dfdl:lengthKind, dfdl:lengthPattern, dfdl:lengthUnits, dfdl:occursCount,
dfdl:occursCountKind, dfdl:outputNewLine dfdl:outputValueCalc,
dfdl:prefxIncludesPrefixLength, dfdl:prefixLengthType,
dfdl:representation, dfdl:terminator, maxOccurs, minOccurs, name: ref,
and type.

Select dfd:byteOrder from the suggestion list, then bigEndian as the
byte order pattern from the suggestion list.

\[ \] Verify the attribute and byte order pattern are inserted and
spaced appropriately.

\[ \] Verify the dfdl: prefix is not inserted with the attribute name.
